README.md, before:


# Doom on Chicory

Port of https://github.com/stepstone-tech/doom-graalvm to Chicory.

![Game window](doom_chicory.png "Game window")

Build with:

`mvn clean package`

Run with:

`java -jar ./target/doom-wasm-1.0-SNAPSHOT-jar-with-dependencies.jar`

The game is running flaky and slowly, but works!

Original Readme:

At [Stepstone](https://www.stepstone.com), as part of our internal brown bag session, we talked about [polyglot capabilities of GraalVM](https://www.graalvm.org/latest/reference-manual/languages/). 
We know, that GraalVM can run javascript, python, llvm and especially WebAssembly. But...
>  **Can it run Doom? :suspect:**

So, we took [Doom port compiled to WebAssembly](https://github.com/diekmann/wasm-fizzbuzz/tree/main/doom) created by [@diekmann](https://github.com/diekmann) and ran it on top of GraalVM. See [Internals](#Internals) for implementation details.

# GraalVM version

This program was written on GraalVM 17+ v22.3. You must install wasm support by running `gu install wasm`.

# Running

> :warning: **To run correctly, you must increase stack size with `-Xss4m`**

From IDE - just run `com.stepstone.jc.demo.Doom` class

From the command line - compile with `mvn package` and then run with:
```bash
java -Xss4m -jar target/doom-*-jar-with-dependencies.jar
```

After this, you should see a Java Swing window **and you can start killing monsters :godmode:**

![Game window](doom.png "Game window")


## Internals

The process of porting Doom to WASM is described in the [original repo](https://github.com/diekmann/wasm-fizzbuzz/tree/main/doom).

GraalVM's support for WASM, for now, is very basic. One important missing feature is the ability to inject java object with bindings, which will be called by the wasm program.
Just running `context.eval("wasm", doomWasmBytes)` will lead to unresolved dependency one `env` and `js` modules.
There is no direct equivalent of [javascript's WebAssembly.instantiate](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/WebAssembly/JavaScript_interface/instantiate) accessible from standard GraalVM polyglot context. That's why we need to do some hacking. We use methods accessible by WebAssembly bindings to read and instantiate the WASM module, and to create an instance of WASM memory.

What we need to do:

* create an object, that will be used as WASM<->GraalVM binding and will contain `js` and `env` objects inside (`com.stepstone.jc.demo.Bindings`)
* load `doom.wasm` module using `com.stepstone.jc.demo.WASMModule.module_decode`
* instantiate this module with bindings using `com.stepstone.jc.demo.WASMModule.module_instantiate`
* having this, we can run Doom's `main()` function to setup game
* then we just need to run periodically main game loop using `doom_loop_step()`

# Native image

It is also possible to compile GraalVM-WASM-based Doom into the native image.

First, you need to run `mvn package` and then run `native-image`:

```bash
native-image --language:wasm --initialize-at-build-time=sun.awt.Toolkit -Djava.awt.headless=false -H:ConfigurationFileDirectories=native-config -H:DynamicProxyConfigurationFiles=native-config\dynamic-proxy.json --no-fallback  -jar target\doom-wasm-1.0-SNAPSHOT-jar-with-dependencies.jar  
```

This way you will have Doom compiled to LLVM, compiled to WASM, wrapped in the Java Swing app, and compiled to native code. Simple, right? ¯\_(ツ)_/¯

Commit message:

Use flag to enable AOT machine
Signed-off-by: Thomas Darimont <thomas.darimont@googlemail.com>

README.md, after:


# Doom on Chicory

Port of https://github.com/stepstone-tech/doom-graalvm to Chicory.

![Game window](doom_chicory.png "Game window")

Build with:

`mvn clean package`

Run with:

`java -jar ./target/doom-wasm-1.0-SNAPSHOT-jar-with-dependencies.jar`

The game is running flaky and slowly, but works!

You can also enable the new AOT (Ahead of time bytecode compilation support) via `-Dchicory.aot=true`

`java -Dchicory.aot=true -jar ./target/doom-wasm-1.0-SNAPSHOT-jar-with-dependencies.jar`

Original Readme:

At [Stepstone](https://www.stepstone.com), as part of our internal brown bag session, we talked about [polyglot capabilities of GraalVM](https://www.graalvm.org/latest/reference-manual/languages/). 
We know, that GraalVM can run javascript, python, llvm and especially WebAssembly. But...
>  **Can it run Doom? :suspect:**

So, we took [Doom port compiled to WebAssembly](https://github.com/diekmann/wasm-fizzbuzz/tree/main/doom) created by [@diekmann](https://github.com/diekmann) and ran it on top of GraalVM. See [Internals](#Internals) for implementation details.

# GraalVM version

This program was written on GraalVM 17+ v22.3. You must install wasm support by running `gu install wasm`.

# Running

> :warning: **To run correctly, you must increase stack size with `-Xss4m`**

From IDE - just run `com.stepstone.jc.demo.Doom` class

From the command line - compile with `mvn package` and then run with:
```bash
java -Xss4m -jar target/doom-*-jar-with-dependencies.jar
```

After this, you should see a Java Swing window **and you can start killing monsters :godmode:**

![Game window](doom.png "Game window")


## Internals

The process of porting Doom to WASM is described in the [original repo](https://github.com/diekmann/wasm-fizzbuzz/tree/main/doom).

GraalVM's support for WASM, for now, is very basic. One important missing feature is the ability to inject java object with bindings, which will be called by the wasm program.
Just running `context.eval("wasm", doomWasmBytes)` will lead to unresolved dependency one `env` and `js` modules.
There is no direct equivalent of [javascript's WebAssembly.instantiate](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/WebAssembly/JavaScript_interface/instantiate) accessible from standard GraalVM polyglot context. That's why we need to do some hacking. We use methods accessible by WebAssembly bindings to read and instantiate the WASM module, and to create an instance of WASM memory.

What we need to do:

* create an object, that will be used as WASM<->GraalVM binding and will contain `js` and `env` objects inside (`com.stepstone.jc.demo.Bindings`)
* load `doom.wasm` module using `com.stepstone.jc.demo.WASMModule.module_decode`
* instantiate this module with bindings using `com.stepstone.jc.demo.WASMModule.module_instantiate`
* having this, we can run Doom's `main()` function to setup game
* then we just need to run periodically main game loop using `doom_loop_step()`

# Native image

It is also possible to compile GraalVM-WASM-based Doom into the native image.

First, you need to run `mvn package` and then run `native-image`:

```bash
native-image --language:wasm --initialize-at-build-time=sun.awt.Toolkit -Djava.awt.headless=false -H:ConfigurationFileDirectories=native-config -H:DynamicProxyConfigurationFiles=native-config\dynamic-proxy.json --no-fallback  -jar target\doom-wasm-1.0-SNAPSHOT-jar-with-dependencies.jar  
```

This way you will have Doom compiled to LLVM, compiled to WASM, wrapped in the Java Swing app, and compiled to native code. Simple, right? ¯\_(ツ)_/¯
